---
layout:	post
title:	"Blog and Boyhood"
date:	2014-07-13 23:17:00
tags:	film general
---


#Hello

I have never been a great writer.  As a soon-to-be graduate student, I have decided that should probably change or at least be a competent writer.  I am a child of the Internet so the only way that I know how to write is to do it on a computer and put it somewhere on the world wide web so here we go.

Most of the topics that I write about will probably focus on the present.  I have been reading a lot as well as consuming television and film at my normal rate while waiting to begin my Master's degree in the Fall.  The books that I have been reading have mostly been fiction; "American Gods" and "Us Conductors" were my last two.  But instead of writing about Neil Gaiman or the invention of the theremin, I want to focus on the movie that I saw yesterday that currently holds a [99 metascore on Metacritic](http://www.metacritic.com/movie/boyhood) after 29 critic reviews and a [100% on Rotten Tomatoes](http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/boyhood/) after 99 critic reviews.  This movie took 12 years to make and it wouldn't have been possible to make it any faster.  The movie is Richard Linklater's most recent completed film, "Boyhood".

#An Enjoyable Film Experience

I had the pleasure of seeing "Boyhood" at [the IFC Center](http://www.ifccenter.com/) with my amazing girlfriend Kira, who surprised me by saying she had not heard about it since she's usually more up to date on the artsy things going on in the world.  To start, I had not been to the IFC Center before and I thoroughly enjoyed the experience.  The Center's third theater was intimate, the seats were upholstered with a comfortable leather, and there was an enjoyable short film preceding the coming attractions that served as a nice palate cleanser.

To preface my disscusion of "Boyhood", I would like to point out that I came across the Wikipedia page for the film a few years ago.  I'm not sure if it had a title then or if it was just called "Untitled Richard Linklater Film", but I am pretty sure that I was [an hour or so into clicking links](http://xkcd.com/214/) and I ended up on Ethan Hawke's page.  Now that I think about it, I was most likely watching Gattaca at the time and that is what started this whole thing.  Either way, I read that the film had started production years earlier and there was still a few years to go.

When I first read that the film was going to take 12 years to film, I was a little dumbfounded, but also skeptical.  

The dumbfounded bit is the reaction that most people have I think.  The reason is that we can barely remember the past week while planning for the week ahead.  Think about it.  If you are currently in, or just recently graduated, college then 12 years ago you were in elementary school or getting ready for the big move up to middle school.  Annual events and milestones are usually how humans keep track of long periods of time.  A helpful event, now that the most recent installment just concluded with a victory for Germany, to keep track of periods of time divisible by 4 years is the World Cup.  I can easily remember where I was 4 years ago during a number of the World Cup games.  I was either at a friend's house or at my own home watching the games.  The 2006 World Cup is a little bit more difficult for me.  I know I was in 8th grade getting ready to be finish middle school.  I remember a few of the games being played on the classroom televisions whenever teachers stopped caring which happens quite frequently in June.  I remember the infamous biting incident.  That was 8 years ago.  I cannot tell you what happened 4 years before that in the World Cup.  I can remember 4th grade.  I had an amazing teacher, but even if there was World Cup madness going around I don't remember if I heard about it.

Try and do the same.  Remember back in your life by 4 year intervals.  If you're older than my 21 years, then you might remember a lot more about what happened to you 12 years ago, but I doubt you can describe your life with as many details as a roll of film can.

My skepticism with the 12 year film project was due to my doubt that it would actually work out.  A lot of films do not make it months into the development phase before something goes awry.  12 years just seems impossible.  The only thing that most people are commited to in their lives for 12 years is grade school and most probably would have avoided it if they could have.  But I guess you cannot compare school to a project with a director like Linklater and an idea like "Boyhood".

Somehow the film worked out and it is now playing at the IFC Center, soon to premiere in major cities.  I will avoid spoilers while talking about the film, but to be completely honest this film cannot be ruined by spoilers.  It is the honey of films.

#Are the 00s Nostalgic Yet?

The first thing that I realized while watching "Boyhood" is that it is a trip down memory lane for every child of the late 90s and early 00s.  Dragonball Z, colorful iMacs, Oregon Trail, and Harry Potter release parties are just a few of pieces of pop culture captured in the 12 years of filming.  When "Crank That (Soulja Boy)" started playing at the beginning of a scene, I couldn't help but dance a little in my seat (and I avoided popular music in my teens like it was the plague).  It does not matter what group you were a part of or what music you listened to, you will get hit in the face by nostalgia at one point during the nearly 3 hours of "Boyhood".

Besides nostalgia, the first hour or so of the film seemed a little slow.  This may be due to my inability to tell how old Mason (the main character played by now 19 year old Ellar Coltrane) or Samantha (Mason's sister played by Linklater's daughter Lorelei Linklater) were.  Ellar seemed like he was about 10 years old for the first hour even though he probably went from being 6 to 12.  Again, that's probably my fault as well as never seeing a movie where the age of the actors doesn't have to be hidden by makeup when the years go by.  The other reason for the first hour feeling slow is neither Mason or Samantha changed much.  None of the characters did.

How much do most children change during their preteen years though?  Other than changing interests depending on what is cool from year to year and (hopefully) learning more complex concepts in school, the preteen years just seem like they pass quickly without much change because they are before puberty.

While there may not have been a lot of character development in the first hour, the film does reveal the nature of Mason's family which is a pretty important part of Mason's development.  Mason's father (also Mason, technically Sr., played by Ethan Hawke) is first shown pulling up in a GTO to pick up his children and being judged by Mason's grandmother on his mother's (Olivia played by Patricia Arquette) side.  He is the archetypal "father who left his family because he wasn't ready to settle down when he got his girlfriend pregnant" and it is very obvious that he is not ready to be an everyday father.  I wasn't impressed by how the family was introduced, but it was only Ethan Hawke's first few minutes on screen and he definitely had plenty of time to make up for it.

After the first hour, the film really picks up.  I think it's because Mason Jr. started to gain some identity.  He starts to ask questions and experience major events that would have an effect on any child of his age.  Ellar really doesn't seem like he was acting at all, which I think was Linklater's intent.  While Ellar does not play Mason as much as Mason is just Ellar's fictional self, both of the children (the family's last name is never revealed, or I didn't pick up on it at least) were very terse.  It felt weird when the children would respond with "good" or "ok".  For a writer and director like Linklater who is very focused on dialogue, the children felt like they killed the pace of some scenes.  I was relieved, to say the least, when Mason Sr. stopped the car while driving with his children and told them how much he disliked their lack of words.

Instead of feeling weird about all of this, I probably should have felt right at home.  When asked by my parents about my day all throughout grade school, I responded with "good".  I did this so often that on most days I would be asked to just explain at least 3 things that happened to me during the school day.  Mason Sr. starts off my telling his kids that he wants to hear more than "good" when he asks about his son's and daughter's day.  This was the first time that Mason Jr. really questions something and asks how his father's day was.  Mason Sr. passes it off and says they should probably just let the conversation happen naturally.  That was the first time that it felt like a real family was on the screen.  It should be noted that this was a few years into filming (even if it was only for a few weeks every year) so it was probably around the time where the actors were really starting to get familiar with one another.

Years pass.  Mason is forced to cut his long hair.  Mason gets his first note from a crush.  Mason drinks his first beer.  His mom marries and divorces twice.  He listens when girls that he likes speak because his father told him to.  To put it simply, Mason grows up and we see moments that shape his life, but we miss so much more.  Just when the film digs deep into a scene in Mason's life, it cuts a year ahead.  We never get to see the recovery after the conflict.  It's another weird thing about the film.  It's sort of like each year is a season of a television series without the last episode.  This isn't a bad thing.  The film's twelfth and final segment gives a feeling of resolution with Mason Jr. even though he is just beginning college.  It has it's cheesy break up conversation that I hope everyone has had to experience at one point in their lives and Mason Sr. comes in to offer his final piece of fatherly advice.  It has a parent breaking down because both children have left the nest.  It has a feel good moment when a Hispanic plumber comes back later on to show how much his life has changed for the better.  But these things are so much less important than the overall transformation of each character.

#Everything Relates to Television

Explaining how each character changed is just as difficult as trying to explain how I, or anyone that I know, have changed in the past 12 years.  The film exhausts the audience because in order to get the full effect you have to think back 12 years (all right, 3 hours in real time, but it even felt like 12 years).  Other films, or film series, have similar effects, but television usually does a better job because television is also filmed over long periods of time so actors can actually play their older selves.  One show that did this really well was "Boy Meets World" and I hate to say that "Boyhood", in 3 hours, accomplishes the same, if not more, goals as "Boy Meets World" did in 7 seasons and 158 episodes.  "Boy Meets World" is still worth watching because it is hilarious and definitely more easily consumed than "Boyhood", but I feel comfortable in saying that Richard Linklater kicks Mr. Feeny's ass at life lesson efficiency.

#Time to Wrap it Up?

I feel very corny and wrong relating "Boyhood" to a Disney Channel series, but I still feel like the comparison is fitting.  The story and family that "Boyhood" presents shares very little with the Matthews family and Mason Jr. is nothing like Cory, but both "Boyhood" and "Boy Meets World" make me feel like I'm going through the process of growing up again when I watch them.  It's a tough feeling to experience and I would prefer not to do it too often, but I am thankful that Richard Linklater made me do it this time.